Practical 14: Sales Data Workbook

Aim

To analyze sales data using Excel formulas and charts.

Objectives
	•	To use SUMIF formulas
	•	To filter categories

Materials Required
	•	Excel

Procedure
	
1. Enter or import sales data – Add sales records manually or import them from an external file to build your dataset.


2. Sort and filter – Organize the data by sorting and apply filters to focus on specific products, dates, or regions.


3. Use SUMIF – Apply the SUMIF function to total sales based on a chosen condition, such as product type or salesperson.


4. Extract text using LEFT/RIGHT – Use LEFT or RIGHT functions to pull specific characters from product codes or IDs.


5. Create line chart – Plot a line chart to visualize sales trends over time for clearer analysis.


6. Protect sheet – Lock the sheet or specific cells to prevent unauthorized edits and maintain data integrity.

ANSWER -

Aim:

To analyze sales data using Excel formulas and charts.

Objectives:

1.To use SUMIF formulas for conditional totals.

2.To filter categories for focused analysis.

Materials Required:

MS Excel

Procedure (Answer):

1.Enter or import sales data:
Add sales records manually or import them from an external file to create a complete dataset.

2.Sort and filter:
Organize the data by sorting and apply filters to view specific products, dates, regions, or categories.

3.Use SUMIF:
Apply the SUMIF function to calculate total sales based on a condition such as product type or salesperson.
Example: =SUMIF(B2:B20, "Electronics", C2:C20)

4.Extract text using LEFT/RIGHT:
Use LEFT or RIGHT functions to extract characters from product codes or IDs.
Example:

A.LEFT(A2, 3) – extracts first 3 characters

B.RIGHT(A2, 4) – extracts last 4 characters

5.Create line chart:
Insert a line chart to display sales trends over time and visually analyze performance.

6.Protect sheet:
Lock the sheet or specific cells to prevent unauthorized edits and maintain data integrity. This protects formulas and prevents accidental changes.

Observation (Answer):

1.SUMIF successfully calculated category-wise total sales.

2.Sorting and filtering helped isolate specific groups for analysis.

3.LEFT/RIGHT correctly extracted text from product codes.

4.The line chart clearly showed sales trends.

5.Protect Sheet secured the worksheet from unwanted edits.

Result:

Sales data was analyzed effectively using Excel tools such as SUMIF, filters, text functions, and charts. The sheet was protected to maintain accuracy and security.

Conclusion:

Excel provides powerful features to analyze and visualize sales data. Protecting the sheet ensures data safety while formulas and charts help interpret sales trends efficiently.
